# A spiral of openness

! This is the draft of a text I am preparing for the OpenDoTT blog, as part of our training on Internet Health and Open Leadership. It feeds from the other materials shared in [this repository](https://github.com/opendott-smartcities/working-open). This paragraph will be removed once the text is finished, but will remain in the commit history. Forever? Who knows...

After an unusual summer (wasn't it?), my second year at the [OpenDoTT project](opendott.org/) started with a change of gears. Not only have I started to engage with the local context of Berlin - a scenario radically different from Dundee in many aspects, in particular those related to reuse of second-hand materials -, but the whole project has a different focus on this phase. Our core activities last year were centred on design research. We have created and conducted studies putting in practice that emphasis. From now on, though, the other fellows and I are expected to start prototyping on top of our previous findings. That will be accomplished by bringing together both technical exploration made possible by open source hardware and software, as well as open methodologies inspired by [Mozilla](https://foundation.mozilla.org/). We will still perform another round of fieldwork, but with these additional layers.

## Proto-tech

I am not - by far - an expert on prototyping technologies. I have however an overall understanding of their potentialities and limitations. Some ideas on where they can be useful to make some of my [concept ideas](https://is.efeefe.me/concepts) more concrete and relatable are already emerging. I am considering for instance the creation of a machine that would recognise objects placed in front of its camera and display different kinds of information about them. Data on repairability, warranty, assistance shops, creative reuse and second-hand market, for example. The machine could be placed in public spaces, flea markets, second-hand stores and the like. I'm looking forward to learning more about prototyping with the help of members of the OpenDoTT consortium, and eventually putting my hands and head to work on ideas like that.

## Openness

It is however with the other theme - "working open" - of this phase that I feel more comfortable engaging, and perhaps contributing. In fact, this may have been one of my main motivations to be a part of this program in the first place. When I applied to join the OpenDoTT project, I was required to write a [motivation letter](https://github.com/opendott-smartcities/working-open/blob/main/spiral/motivation-letter.pdf). There I already mentioned some of the projects I had been involved with since well over a decade. Many if not all of them had elements of openness as their core principles.

It was against that background that I attended the training module about internet health and open leadership recently offered by Mozilla to the OpenDoTT fellows. It turned out to be totally different from the experience I had last year during the design research training module. In that first case, I was in the mood of absorbing a structured, clear and neat approach to a set of practices I had used before in a more incidental and superficial way. Even though I was not totally new to participatory methods, I felt as though I was acquiring a more robust way to put them to use - learning how to design, conduct and analyse the outcomes of those kinds of experiments. When it comes to practices of openness, though, I do not come from a position of little experience. Rather, I carry with me a rich background of initiatives we have been involved with that not only dialogue with whatever is currently understood as open methods, but indeed challenges them in various ways. If anyone noticed, I have - in the last sentence - just changed from talking about "my" experience to "our" initiatives. This is a central point of this text, which is being made in an indirect way.

My way through the training on internet health and making in the open was also fruitful as an opportunity to return to texts I had read in the past, initiatives I have witnessed, and projects I have been directly involved with. I was very conscious of not dominating the discussions with my colleagues in the calls during the training week. For that reason, whenever I had the chance to speak I didn't even know where exactly to start. I feel that when we talk about open methodologies there are many universes apart from each other, and very few points of overlap.

It took me then a little longer to write about the theme. It is simply too big, where I'm coming from. There's no way to account for everything in a single blog post. No way to write briefly and in a linear way about my perceptions of that training. I decided to use the [repository](https://github.com/opendott-smartcities/working-open) I created during the training as a place to brainstorm and store semi-structured insights. What follows are notes based on that process. They are incomplete and insufficient, but may be a good way to start conversations. Or more than one good way to start conversations.

## Loose notes / seeds for conversation

### WEIRD

Right before we started the training on web health and open initiatives (in that very first morning, if I'm not mistaken), a message in the [nettime mailing list](https://nettime.org) drew my attention. Yes, I'm still a lurker at some of those mailing lists from times past. There was then this message, never replied, mentioning a book review titled "[Why Are We in the West So Weird? A Theory](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/12/books/review/the-weirdest-people-in-the-world-joseph-henrich.html)". I'm likely not going to read the book, but found the acronym amusing: Western, Educated, Industrialised, and from Rich and Democratic countries. Some weeks later I found another mention to WEIRD while (audio-) reading Kate Raworth's "[Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doughnut_Economics:_Seven_Ways_to_Think_Like_a_21st-Century_Economist)" (no, I'm not a fan of that image - will comment on that some other time). WEIRD is apparently a way to acknowledge how much the current common sense is biased towards the imaginary of people coming from that kind of background. With the risk of ruining a clever wordplay, I would contend a somewhat denser version, though:

- Western / Northern;
- White / Male;
- Educated, or rather “taught” a worldview that reinforces this very bias;
- Industrialised, seizing largely on externalities;
- Rich, often based on structural unbalance, primitive accumulation and/or war;
- Democratic... or so they say, and some do believe.

It was not only that book review that accompanied me during the training, of course. I am more aware of such contextual setting nowadays than I was the first time I learnt about free software two decades ago. But reading that email prompted me to be even more explicitly aware of it as the training went on. It was sometimes amusing, and in others disheartening to realise how much a WEIRD perspective is at the core of a good part of the free/open cosmogony. Some of its tropes deserve a more critical attention, particularly that of the lone hero taking on the world - not surprisingly, it's often a white man, healthy (if sometimes addicted to substances), well versed in tech and with perfect domain of the language spoken by authorities and the elite. To be honest, I myself have been that guy more than once in Brazil, and am grateful to have been made aware of it by bright members of our networks, time and again. I'm still learning, though.

There has been extensive critique about the cultural biases of the open source movements. One of the works I like the most, and have had the chance to re-read recently in its paper edition, is "In the Shade of the Commons: Towards a Culture of Open Networks", published by the Waag Society in 2006 ([PDF here](https://waag.org/sites/waag/files/Publicaties/InTheShade.pdf)). Therein lies the "Letter to the Commons", which starts this way:

> Greetings! This missive arrives at your threshold from the proverbial Asiatic street, located in the shadow of an improvised bazaar, where all manner of oriental pirates and other dodgy characters gather to trade in what many amongst you consider to be stolen goods. We call them ‘borrowed’ goods. But a   difference in the language in which one talks about things (‘stolen’ vs, ‘borrowed’) is also a measure of the distance between two different worlds.
> You can only steal something if it is owned by someone in the first place. If things are not ‘owned’ but only held in custody, then they can only be ‘borrowed’ as opposed to being stolen. So what you call a ‘pirated’ DVD is what we would call a DVD ‘borrowed’ from the street, and the price we pay for it is equivalent, or at least analogous to an incremental subscription to the great circulating public library of the Asiatic street.

In other words: who are you to claim you have property over an idea to be able to share it under an open license? There's a lot to be discussed here, but I'll only point a parallel to the idea of [primitive accumulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primitive_accumulation_of_capital) (and add that to the list of topics about which I need to read and reflect a lot more).

### Open... or what?

What does "working open" oppose to? An usual take is to think in terms of binaries, "open vs proprietary" being a prominent one. But what does that opposition denote? There is a well documented perspective according to which it's a matter of "licensing", or determining the terms according to which a given set of digital information will circulate. That view of course owes a lot to the vocabulary of "free and open source software" (based on four core principles for sharing its source code, which embed a clear ideological stance) and "open source" (where the source code is available, but the political vocabulary is removed to make it more palatable, so to speak) against "proprietary software" (in which case the source code is not available for anyone by default). If that definition tends to work relatively well to describe how software and its source code are distributed, however, trying to extend it to other realms it tricky at best.

In the [digital culture strategy for the Pontos de Cultura](https://is.efeefe.me/stuff/brazil-floss-process) project in Brazil we have embraced creative commons licenses as a way to make explicit the generous nature of what we were trying to accomplish. We were too young and optimistic then, which may have made us overlook issues of exploitation and power imbalances. Hope and faith are a central element of free/open projects, as I'll expand on later. There was also an expectation that everybody joined in. We were often disappointed by crossing paths with people who were not willing to join the cult of open. And yet, true collaboration can not be mandatory, as Geert Lovink noted in [The Principle of Notworking](https://monoskop.org/images/f/fd/Lovink_Geert_The_Principle_of_Notworking_Concepts_in_Critical_Internet_Culture_2005.pdf):

> Key to our effort to theorize individual and collective experiences, is the recognition that there must be a freedom to refuse to collaborate. There must be a constitutive exit strategy. At first instance this may be a mysterious, somewhat paradoxical statement. Why should the idea of the refusal be promoted as the very foundation of collaboration, as Christoph Spehr has suggested? It almost sounds like a new dogma, a next rule, notworking as yet another human right. The question of ‘free cooperation’ is, in essence, one of organization and comes up after the crisis of the (Fordist) factory model and its political mirror, the political party.

Several years later, we would approach the "open" differently. There was an interregnum during which all the accomplishments we have had in the first years of government-funded digital culture were sabotaged and thrown away. In 2014, a colleague and I worked on a study about experimental practices on culture and technology. Instead of open licenses, we entertained the idea of a "culture of openness". Here in a quick and dirty translation:

> In the same direction, we could identify yet another conceptual fold over the idea of a free culture. To escape the limitation found in a merely transactional logic of flexible copyright licenses, one could simply avoid focusing on minutiae of individual transactions (the specific license of a given cultural product made available online) to propose a culture that does not define itself as objectively free (a topic for eternal arguments). One could instead work with the idea of a "culture of openness" that is processual and always dependent on intentionality and context. A culture of openness would work as a framework within which diverse modes of working could relate to each other. From releasing multimedia contents with free license, through to investigation of ancestral cultures, from fostering socially relevant innovation and creative production, or even researching possible exchanges between permaculture, solidary economy and digital culture - all of it would refer to the field, still to be thoroughly defined, of the culture of openness. On the one hand it would allow to escape the limitations of a transactional logic that devalues the potential of free production due to a supposed short reach of a given cultural product, and on the other hand asserts the intentional gesture of generosity as an element for politicising the making of culture, present in humanity since millenia before the first computer was made.

[Arranjos Experimentais Criativos em Cultura Digital](https://redelabs-org.github.io/livro/minc-14/1/analise) (Original in Portuguese).

### Plurality of worldviews

I once realised, during an international workshop on open and collaborative science, that a common expression we used in many projects in Brazil was hard to translate to English. It was "conhecimentos". Sure, the single noun conhecimento is usually translated as "knowledge". But I struggled to find a way to add other dimensions to it. It's unusual to read of "knowledges". It may be something with the English language itself. Is it then too mono-dimensional a language to allow people to understand a world in which knowledge is not at all single and universal? In our practices, it's common to make reference to "conhecimentos" to acknowledge the fact that different cultures often have worldviews, systems of values and cultural expectations that differ completely from one another. We would talk for instance about "conhecimentos tradicionais" (knowledges of traditional communities - native amerindians, quilombolas, ribeirinhas, other rural- or forest- located groups) in a manner akin to someone who talks about "urban cultures".

It may be this awareness that makes me wary of attempts to reduce complex realities to supposedly universal approaches. While I do appreciate aspects of books such as the Doughnut Economics, as mentioned earlier I don't like the image. In attempting to capture the complexity of reality with a single image, such efforts may end up mimicking the very structures they oppose. I'm [not a fan of circular economy](https://is.efeefe.me/opendott/waste-value-and-reuse), for similar reasons. Can we discuss openness taking into account a myriad of worldviews, perspectives, cosmogonies?

Another tale of translation... but before that, a note: my writing always brings personal stories. I won't apologize. In this text, in fact, it is intentional. Part of the indirect point I'm trying to make. I remember interviewing a community leader in a Guarani village who would start and finish all his interventions like this: "it is important (this and that and the other thing)... it is important." Redundancy and elliptical thinking are a cultural method. Back to the translation: interacting with the emergence of creative commons in the cultural scenario in Brazil, a senior law scholar noted that the correct term in Portuguese would be "rossio". That's the term that defines land used by a community, in a regime of shared or rather inexistent property. The term is not used contemporarily in Brazil. The very notion of land without an owner is foreign these days.

That reminds me of how much talking about a commons suggests a return to times past, before the enclosures that supposedly laid the foundations of capitalist development in late medieval Europe. This clear opposition of commons and property makes sense historically, in Europe. In many parts of the world, however, it was a matter of destroying large swathes of forest and replacing it with plantations based on slave labour. Whatever relation there was beforehand was not necessarily similar to the medieval commons. Nor was it replaced by free work rewarded with money (as some people insist happened everywhere).

So - not only open as non-proprietary. Not only open as non-linear, or not enclosed. What if we think also of open-ended? Doing things without the need to decide previously what their purposes, methods or goals are. I do have a problem with the rhetoric of world-changing projects that is embedded in the startup mentality. "You must start with a great idea, and convince people to help you out". What if I don't have a clear idea, and don't want to explore people's work? It's interesting to think about circularity, not only in terms of supplying materials for industrial production, but as a way to interact with the world. An anthropologist once taught me that what we were doing with the government and Universities was not easily comprehensible to some traditional communities in Brazil. The focus on "projects" that have a start point and an expected finish line is nonsensical for a number of cultures. Who says you have started only that day? What about the many paths that brought you there? And who says the project will end? The sun will come up the next day. The seasons will keep on changing, or so we hope. It was only successful if people are willing to remember it.

So there is indeed an aspect of circularity that should be brought to the discussion of working open. Not "open projects", but instead open ways to interfere in the world. If that is the goal, then, it may not be perfectly circular - as we are willing to change things and don't want them to get back to the same precise spot. Another colleague in Brazil is currently organising a series of meetings about space, arts, technology and related topics. In [one of those meetings](https://youtu.be/Cxmm7aFqkLc?t=1478 ), a professor was presenting his research on ethnoastronomy, and offered this beautiful description of an image made by amerindians:

"This one is a spiral, ok. And what about this spiral? (...) The most beautiful explanation I found was the following: it represents the beginning and the end. And that in our life we'll never be - we always say it's circular, right, represented by an ellipse - it means that whatever position we're returning to, even if things have not changed, we ourselves have changed. So it is not the same. The circle does not close in order to become an ellipse."

That may be a good way to go, then. Open-ended, spiral openness.

This text is not finished. It will likely never be. It is loosely connected with the GitHub repository mentioned above, particularly the subfolder named "[spiral](https://github.com/opendott-smartcities/working-open/tree/main/spiral)", and a slide presentation available in [PDF format](https://github.com/opendott-smartcities/working-open/blob/main/spiral/spiral-of-openness.pdf).
